---
title: "Open archaeology: a survey of collaborative software engineering in archaeological research"
author:
  - Zack Batist
  - Joe Roe
desc: "Abstract to be submitted to the Journal of Computer Applications in Archaeology, special collection on 50 years of computational archaeology. See https://journal.caa-international.org/about/special-collections and https://github.com/zackbatist/openarchaeo-collaboration."
---

Archaeology has a long tradition of adopting common or 'off the shelf' tools to serve our own unique purposes that are not typically anticipated by their original designers. However, archaeologists are increasingly taking it upon themselves to program their own software rather than rely on generic and commercially-produced information processing systems. In fact, archaeologists have been prolific computer programmers and have been coding a variety of functions and libraries that serve uniquely archaeological problems and purposes for decades now [@cowgill1967]. Although the intersection of archaeology and software engineering is not new, contemporary projects are distinguished by their adoption of practices from open source software development, particularly use of the git version control system and associated web-based source code management platforms (e.g. GitHub and GitLab) to facilitate collaboration among multiple developers. This paper investigates how archaeological software development has adopted open source development models, specifically focusing on how archaeologists implement their collaborative features.

We use open-archaeo (https://open-archaeo.info/), a curated list of 300+ active open source archaeological software packages, augmented with data collected from GitHub's API, to identify _what_ kinds of software archaeologists are making, and to evaluate _how_ archaeologists create these tools, with particular emphasis on practices of collaboration. We find that collaborative open source software development in archaeology, measured both in the number of projects and discrete contributions tracked in git repositories, has seen a rapid and sustained increase beginning around 2015. Our analysis also shows an uneven use of git and GitHub's extended features, beyond their basic usage as a version control system and repository host. The vast majority of repositories have 1–3 contributors, with only a few distinguished by an active and diverse developer base. Similarly, collaborative features such as GitHub "issues" are used in only a minority of repositories. Network analysis of contributions made towards software development projects, which is still in a prelimary phase, will identify certain common factors pertaining to projects exhibiting varying degrees of collaborative work. By analyzing interactions archaeologists among using the GitHub platform, including the ways they contribute to collective code bases, we demonstrate how archaeological software engineering is beginning to foster new kinds of collaborative commitments that are rooted in established cultural practices.
